DEER (#134)
tfpauly/draft-pauly-adaptive-dns-privacy: draft-pauly-add-deer.md

--- abstract

This document defines Discovery of Equivalent Encrypted Resolvers (DEER), a mechanism for DNS

> clients to query a resolver over unencrypted DNS for encrypted DNS configuration. It is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
clients to use unencrypted DNS to discover a resolver's encrypted DNS configuration. It is
```

> designed to be agnostic of different forms of DNS encryption for future flexibility. It

Reviewer: ```suggestion
designed to be agnostic to different forms of DNS encryption for future flexibility. It
```

> is also designed to provide assurance that the encrypted server connection is controlled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is also designed to ensure that the encrypted server connection is controlled
```

by the same party controlling the unencrypted transmission of the configuration.
Opportunistic encryption that does not provide that assurance is defined as an option for
clients willing to accept that risk.

--- middle

# Introduction

When DNS clients wish to use encrypted protocols such as DNS-over-TLS (DoT) {{!RFC7858}}
or DNS-over-HTTPS (DoH) {{!RFC8484}}, they require additional information beyond the IP

> address of the DNS server. However, it is common for DNS clients to only learn a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
address of the DNS server, such as the resolver's hostname. However, it is common for DNS clients to only learn a
```

> resolver's IP address during configuration. Such mechanisms include network advertisement

Reviewer: ```suggestion
resolver's IP address during configuration. Such mechanisms include network provisioning
```

> such as DHCP and RA as well as manual configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
protocols like DHCP and IPv6 Router Advertisements, as well as manual configuration.
```

This document addresses encrypted DNS resolver discovery with two goals in mind:

> enable discovery from only an IP address, and allow clients to confirm the encrypted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
enable discovery when only an IP address is known, and allow clients to confirm that the encrypted
```

> server connection they establish is the same entity they were querying without

Reviewer: ```suggestion
resolver they connect to is the same entity as the known resolver that did not use
```

encryption.

For DNS servers that do not support encryption, their encrypted connection configuration
can be requested by a new special use domain name (SUDN). For DNS servers that do support

> encryption, this configuration can be requested by their own domain name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
encryption, this configuration can be requested based on a query for their own domain name.
```

The TLS certificate used with the resolver name MUST have the IP addresses for each of its DNS
endpoints within the SubjectAlternativeName field to allow the client to support authenticated
discovery.

## Authenticated Discovery from Unencrypted Resolvers {#bootstrapping}

When a DNS client is configured with an Unencrypted Resolver IP address, it SHOULD query
the resolver for SVCB records for "dns://resolver.arpa" before making other queries.

A DNS client MUST validate the Equivalent Encrypted Resolver and the Unencrypted Resolver that advertised it are
related, the client MUST check the SubjectAlternativeName field of the Equivalent Encrypted Resolver's
TLS certificate for the Unencrypted Resolver's IP address and the advertised IP address for the
Equivalent Encrypted Resolver. If both are present, the discovered Equivalent Encrypted Resolver MUST
be used whenever the Unencrypted Resolver would have been used. Otherwise, the client MUST NOT use the
discovered resolver and SHOULD suppress queries for Equivalent Encrypted Resolvers against
this resolver for the TTL of the negative or invalid response and continue to use the original resolver.

> ### Why both IP addresses are required

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Rationale for Validating Both Resolver Addresses 
```

It is imperative that DNS clients require the IP addresses of both the Unencrypted Resolver
and the Equivalent Encrypted Resolver to be present in the TLS certificate.

If either IP address is not verified, an attacker can craft an SVCB record that will send the client
to a valid Encrypted Resolver that has no relationship with the Unencrypted Resolver.

### Encrypted Resolver SVCB Key Names {#encryption-types}

This document defines SVCB keys for discovering DoH and DoT Equivalent Encrypted Resolvers.
Future versions or other documents may define additional keys for discovery of resolvers
using other encrypted transports.

> #### SVCB Records for Equivalent Encrypted Resolvers using DoH

Reviewer: We may not want to nest so deeply, but can clean up later

Author: Agreed. I have no attachment to the current structure versus a flatter one. I just chose something to prevent writer's deadlock. The same is true of in-section security comments versus a security consideration section.

the Unencrypted Resolver's IP address. This is why there are no mechanisms defined for
Unencrypted Resolvers to advertise a different IP address unless it can be authenticated.

The reasoning behind this is to ensure the threat model for opportunistic encryption is
not weaker than simply continuing to use unencrypted DNS. If the IP address of the
Unencrypted Resolver was acquired by the DNS client securely such as by manual configuration,
allowing on-path attackers an opportunity to change the destination IP address for an
encrypted connection would worsen the security of the client. 

## Encrypted Resolvers advertising Equivalent Encrypted Resolvers

A DNS client may want to discover other DNS encryption transports supported by a given
Encrypted Resolver. This can be accomplished by using the same mechanism but sending an SVCB
query to the name of the Encrypted Resolver instead of the resolver.arpa SUDN.

This enables a resolver to modify its answer to match the name being queried. It also
enables resolvers to recursively answer the query if it is for a name it is not authoritative
for. An example where this would be useful is when a client has DoH and DoT configuration

> for resolver Foo but only DoH configuration for resolver Bar. If DoH is being blocked on

Reviewer: Maybe use an `example.com` thing instead of Foo?

Author: Good call.
